CS 224N: Assignment #1
Due date: 1/25 11:59 PM PST (You are allowed to use three (3) late days maximum for this
assignment)
These questions require thought, but do not require long answers. Please be as concise as possible.
We encourage students to discuss in groups for assignments. However, each student must ﬁnish
the problem set and programming assignment individually, and must turn in her/his
assignment. We ask that you abide by the university Honor Code and that of the Computer Science
department, and make sure that all of your submitted work is done by yourself. If you have discussed
the problems with others, please include a statement saying who you discussed problems with. Failure
to follow these instructions will be reported to the Oﬃce of Community Standards.
Please review any additional instructions posted on the assignment page at
http://cs224n.stanford.edu/assignment1. When you are ready to submit, please follow the in-
structions on the course website. Make sure you test your code using the provided commands
and do not edit outside of the marked areas. Code that does not run on corn or
incorporates additional libraries will receive no credit.
1 Softmax (10 points)
(a) (5 points) Prove that softmax is invariant to constant oﬀsets in the input, that is, for any input vector
x and any constant c,
softmax(x) = softmax(x +c)
wherex +c means adding the constant c to every dimension of x. Remember that
softmax(x)i = exi
∑
jexj
(1)
Note: In practice, we make use of this property and choose c =− maxixi when computing softmax
probabilities for numerical stability (i.e., subtracting its maximum element from all elements of x).
(b) (5 points) Given an input matrix of N rows and D columns, compute the softmax prediction for each
row using the optimization in part (a). Write your implementation in q1 softmax.py. You may test
by executing python q1 softmax.py.
Note: The provided tests are not exhaustive. Later parts of the assignment will reference this code so
it is important to have a correct implementation. Your implementation should also be eﬃcient and
vectorized whenever possible (i.e., use numpy matrix operations rather than for loops). A non-vectorized
implementation will not receive full credit!
2 Neural Network Basics (30 points)
(a) (3 points) Derive the gradients of the sigmoid function and show that it can be rewritten as a function
of the function value (i.e., in some expression where only σ(x), but not x, is present). Assume that the
input x is a scalar for this question. Recall, the sigmoid function is
σ(x) = 1
1 +e−x (2)
1
CS 224N: Assignment #1
(b) (3 points) Derive the gradient with regard to the inputs of a softmax function when cross entropy loss
is used for evaluation, i.e., ﬁnd the gradients with respect to the softmax input vector θ, when the
prediction is made by ˆy = softmax(θ). Remember the cross entropy function is
CE(y, ˆy) =−
∑
i
yi log(ˆyi) (3)
wherey is the one-hot label vector, and ˆy is the predicted probability vector for all classes. ( Hint: you
might want to consider the fact many elements of y are zeros, and assume that only the k-th dimension
ofy is one.)
(c) (6 points) Derive the gradients with respect to the inputs x to an one-hidden-layer neural network (that
is, ﬁnd ∂J
∂x whereJ =CE(y, ˆy) is the cost function for the neural network). The neural network employs
sigmoid activation function for the hidden layer, and softmax for the output layer. Assume the one-hot
label vector is y, and cross entropy cost is used. (Feel free to use σ′(x) as the shorthand for sigmoid
gradient, and feel free to deﬁne any variables whenever you see ﬁt.)
x
h
ˆy
Recall that the forward propagation is as follows
h = sigmoid(xW1 +b1) ˆy = softmax(hW2 +b2)
Note that here we’re assuming that the input vector (thus the hidden variables and output probabilities)
is a row vector to be consistent with the programming assignment. When we apply the sigmoid function
to a vector, we are applying it to each of the elements of that vector.Wi andbi (i = 1, 2) are the weights
and biases, respectively, of the two layers.
(d) (2 points) How many parameters are there in this neural network, assuming the input is Dx-dimensional,
the output is Dy-dimensional, and there are H hidden units?
(e) (4 points) Fill in the implementation for the sigmoid activation function and its gradient inq2 sigmoid.py.
Test your implementation using python q2 sigmoid.py. Again, thoroughly test your code as the pro-
vided tests may not be exhaustive.
(f) (4 points) To make debugging easier, we will now implement a gradient checker. Fill in the implementa-
tion for gradcheck naive in q2 gradcheck.py. Test your code using python q2 gradcheck.py.
(g) (8 points) Now, implement the forward and backward passes for a neural network with one sigmoid
hidden layer. Fill in your implementation in q2 neural.py. Sanity check your implementation with
python q2 neural.py.
3 word2vec (40 points + 2 bonus)
(a) (3 points) Assume you are given a “predicted” word vector vc corresponding to the center word c for
Skip-Gram, and word prediction is made with the softmax function found in word2vec models
ˆyo =p(o|c) = exp(u⊤
ovc)∑V
w=1 exp(u⊤wvc)
(4)
Page 2 of 5
CS 224N: Assignment #1
where uw (w = 1,...,V ) are the “output” word vectors for all words in the vocabulary. Assuming
cross entropy cost is applied to this prediction and word o is the expected word (the o-th element of the
one-hot label vector is one), derive the gradients with respect to vc.
Hint: It will be helpful to use notation from question 2. For instance, letting ˆy be the vector of softmax
predictions for every word, y as the expected word vector, and the loss function
Jsof tmax−CE(o,vc,U) =CE(y, ˆy) (5)
whereU = [u1,u2,··· ,uV ] is the matrix of all the output vectors. Make sure you state the orientation
of your vectors and matrices.
(b) (3 points) As in the previous part, derive gradients for the “output” word vectors uk’s (including uo).
(c) (6 points) Repeat part (a) and (b) assuming we are using the negative sampling loss for the predicted
vectorvc, and the expected output word index iso. Assume that K negative samples (words) are drawn,
and they are 1, 2,...,K respectively for simplicity of notation (o /∈{ 1,...,K }). Again, for a given word,
o, denote its output vector as uo. The negative sampling loss function in this case is
Jneg−sample(o,vc,U) =− log(σ(u⊤
ovc))−
K∑
k=1
log(σ(−u⊤
kvc)) (6)
where σ(·) is the sigmoid function.
After you’ve done this, describe with one sentence why this cost function is much more eﬃcient to
compute than the softmax-CE loss (you could provide a speed-up ratio, i.e., the runtime of the softmax-
CE loss divided by the runtime of the negative sampling loss).
Note: the cost function here is the negative of what Mikolov et al had in their original paper, because we
are doing a minimization instead of maximization in our code.
(d) (8 points) Suppose the center word is c = wt and the context words are [ wt−m, ... , wt−1, wt, wt+1,
... , wt+m], where m is the context size. Derive gradients for all of the word vectors for Skip-Gram and
CBOW given the previous parts.
Hint: feel free to useF (o,vc) (whereo is the expected word) as a placeholder for theJsof tmax−CE(o,vc,... )
or Jneg−sample(o,vc,... ) cost functions in this part — you’ll see that this is a useful abstraction for the
coding part. That is, your solution may contain terms of the form ∂F (o,vc)
∂... .
Recall that for skip-gram, the cost for a context centered around c is
Jskip-gram(wt−m...t+m) =
∑
−m≤j≤m,j̸=0
F (wt+j,vc) (7)
where wt+j refers to the word at the j-th index from the center.
CBOW is slightly diﬀerent. Instead of using vc as the predicted vector, we use ˆv deﬁned below. For (a
simpler variant of) CBOW, we sum up the input word vectors in the context
ˆv =
∑
−m≤j≤m,j̸=0
vwt+j (8)
then the CBOW cost is
JCBOW(wc−m...c+m) =F (wt, ˆv) (9)
Note: To be consistent with the ˆv notation such as for the code portion, for skip-gram ˆv =vc.
Page 3 of 5
CS 224N: Assignment #1
(e) (12 points) In this part you will implement the word2vec models and train your own word vectors
with stochastic gradient descent (SGD). First, write a helper function to normalize rows of a matrix in
q3 word2vec.py. In the same ﬁle, ﬁll in the implementation for the softmax and negative sampling cost
and gradient functions. Then, ﬁll in the implementation of the cost and gradient functions for the skip-
gram model. When you are done, test your implementation by running python q3 word2vec.py.
Note: If you choose not to implement CBOW (part h), simply remove the NotImplementedError so that
your tests will complete.
(f) (4 points) Complete the implementation for your SGD optimizer in q3 sgd.py. Test your implemen-
tation by running python q3 sgd.py.
(g) (4 points) Show time! Now we are going to load some real data and train word vectors with everything
you just implemented! We are going to use the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) dataset to train word
vectors, and later apply them to a simple sentiment analysis task. You will need to fetch the datasets
ﬁrst. To do this, run sh get datasets.sh. There is no additional code to write for this part; just
run python q3 run.py.
Note: The training process may take a long time depending on the eﬃciency of your implementation
(an eﬃcient implementation takes approximately an hour) . Plan accordingly!
When the script ﬁnishes, a visualization for your word vectors will appear. It will also be saved as
q3 word vectors.png in your project directory. Include the plot in your homework write up.
Brieﬂy explain in at most three sentences what you see in the plot.
(h) (Extra credit: 2 points) Implement the CBOW model in q3 word2vec.py. Note: This part is optional
but the gradient derivations for CBOW in part (d) are not! .
4 Sentiment Analysis (20 points)
Now, with the word vectors you trained, we are going to perform a simple sentiment analysis. For each
sentence in the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset, we are going to use the average of all the word vectors
in that sentence as its feature, and try to predict the sentiment level of the said sentence. The sentiment
level of the phrases are represented as real values in the original dataset, here we’ll just use ﬁve classes:
“very negative (−−)”, “negative (−)”, “neutral”, “positive (+)”, “very positive (++)”
which are represented by 0 to 4 in the code, respectively. For this part, you will learn to train a softmax
classiﬁer, and perform train/dev validation to improve generalization.
(a) (2 points) Implement a sentence featurizer. A simple way of representing a sentence is taking the average
of the vectors of the words in the sentence. Fill in the implementation in q4 sentiment.py.
(b) (1 points) Explain in at most two sentences why we want to introduce regularization when doing classi-
ﬁcation (in fact, most machine learning tasks).
(c) (2 points) Fill in the hyperparameter selection code in q4 sentiment.py to search for the “op-
timal” regularization parameter. You need to implement both getRegularizationValues and
chooseBestModel. Attach your code for chooseBestModel to your written write-up. You should
be able to attain at least 36.5% accuracy on the dev and test sets using the pretrained vectors in part
(d).
(d) (3 points) Run python q4 sentiment.py --yourvectors to train a model using your word vectors
from q3. Now, run python q4 sentiment.py --pretrained to train a model using pretrained
GloVe vectors (on Wikipedia data). Compare and report the best train, dev, and test accuracies. Why
do you think the pretrained vectors did better? Be speciﬁc and justify with 3 distinct reasons.
Page 4 of 5
CS 224N: Assignment #1
(e) (4 points) Plot the classiﬁcation accuracy on the train and dev set with respect to the regularization
value for the pretrained GloVe vectors, using a logarithmic scale on the x-axis. This should have been
done automatically. Include q4 reg acc.png in your homework write up. Brieﬂy explain in at
most three sentences what you see in the plot.
(f) (4 points) We will now analyze errors that the model makes (with pretrained GloVe vectors). When you
ran python q4 sentiment.py --pretrained , two ﬁles should have been generated. Take a look
at q4 dev conf.png and include it in your homework writeup . Interpret the confusion matrix
in at most three sentences.
(g) (4 points) Next, take a look at q4 dev pred.txt. Choose 3 examples where your classiﬁer made errors
and brieﬂy explain the error and what features the classiﬁer would need to classify the example correctly
(1 sentence per example). Try to pick examples with diﬀerent reasons.
Page 5 of 5